So they, they will just,
just step
Oh, good morning and welcome to the slick money.
Uh, so we have you, so just
before 9:00 PM uh, sorry, 9:00 AM I should say.
Uh, we're going to need to move into the house,
but, uh, look, thank you
for being here with us this morning.
We want to make some open comments to introduce yourselves
and, uh, then move to questions from members.
Yes. Thank you. Um, I just want to take a moment
to acknowledge the National Day
of Reflection being observed across New Zealand today.
This day invites us to pause, to remember, and to reflect
and to recognize the responsibility we all carry
to help shape the future where we truly care about safety,
dignity, and respect.
This year, we've had the wonderful benefit of, um, the,
a survivor, Dr.
Jenny Hohepa. Tupu, contributing to our work through our
advisory group, and the stories encourage of survivors.
Remind us why the work we do matters.
Because every policy, program,
or partnership sit in front of people, families,
and communities whose trust we must continue
to honor and uphold.
In 24, 25, we stayed close to our communities,
listened deeply, acted with purpose.
We remain grounded in our values, energized
by the people we serve.
I want to sincerely thank the Pacific communities across
New Zealand for their trust.
Uh, your voices and aspirations guide everything that we do.
And I also want to thank our staff for their dedication,
creativity, and serving community.
We've developed use to continue, uh, setting a path, values
and focus on education, business development, employment,
housing, health, and languages.
And before I hand back to you, I'd like
to introduce my team at the ministry.
So we've got Danielo, Danielo, Alda,
um, Florence Malama, and Bernadette Scanlon.
We're a very small team
and we work closely together,
so they will actively, uh, contribute.
They jump in at times to help with our Tylenol today.
Um, m back to you.
Thank you very much, um, coming.
Hey, thank you so much for, um, the report
and all of the work that you've undertaken.
I've got, um, lots of different questions.
It's hard because I know I'm not gonna
be able to ask them all.
Uh, so I think where, where I'm going to start
is probably with staffing levels.
Um, I want you just to talk through the decline
that we've seen already
and then also to, um, let us know if you're anticipating
that to further decline in the next year.
Um, and I know that in the past, Geraldine, you've said
that you've been able to kind of consolidate the resource
that you, uh, have got despite the stick declining in staff.
But clearly there's got
to be some impact on your work program.
Uh, and I want to know where you've had,
where you've experienced a reduction
or you've had to pull back on areas
because you have had the staff reductions that you have.
Yeah. Um, I'd like to start by saying
that we are a small agency
with a really big mission at the moment.
Our staffing levels are sit at 99.
Um, FTE we undertook a really comprehensive process, uh,
in the previous two years to, as you mentioned, uh, cluster
and consolidate, uh, the functions that we do.
We have had, uh, some turnover this year, which,
uh, we've been, I I I've been really delighted about.
'cause what it means is that staff have had the opportunity
to grow, develop, and move into other roles
around the public service.
In terms of our core functions,
we have delivered on everything
that we undertook to deliver.
Um, I haven't seen any, you know, there,
there will always be comments from as we more, um, the,
about some of those interventions, perhaps No, around, uh,
the, the future Staffing.
Yeah. One of those, um, strategic priorities
that we've delivered on is our Pacific
Healthy Homes Initiative.
And so it's about tackling the, um, root causes contributing
to poor Pacific Health.
So, um, um, cold d unsafe housing.
Over the past year,
we've delivered over 10,000 housing home intervention.
So these are things such as insulation, vent, ventilation,
safety, um, you know, one family in elderly,
couple in their seventies with three mouna in their care,
one with a chronic health illness repeatedly hospitalized.
So we helped to upgrade their, um, home
through in implementation of ventilation, insulation, um,
and basic safety repair, such as fixing broken windows.
And so that resulted in a warmer, drier, healthier home.
And more importantly, for the mouna, um,
less hospital visits.
At the heart of it, it's about, um,
intergenerational health gains,
but also reduced health costs to the system.
So that's just one of 489 households that we've been able
to create warmer, healthy, uh, dry homes.
Um, we don't, we haven't seen, uh, um,
in terms of, uh, we, we staff out, we, we don't anticipate
that there will be any changes
or reductions going forward. You're
Not anticipating a further decline in staffing
numbers going into the next
Financial year.
I, I think the, the main thing is we are thinking ahead,
but we don't, we, as much as possible, we try
and preserve the interaction
that our staff have with communities.
Um, and so if we were to look at anything like that, um,
it would be in the context
of what's happening in the environment, the
and all opportunities data, and we haven't got end,
but he's looking to, uh, be more efficient, do better always
with the, the community need, um, at heart.
And I also add, you've mentioned, um, yes,
we might have reduced our numbers over time,
but we also like to think of it,
we've got really focused team.
I'm really proud that our policy
and insights team have increased the number
of their advice from 126 pieces
to 200 over the course of the year.
So we've increased our output whilst
having a really dedicated team.
Okay. So I've just got two more subs on this.
So, um, there has been an expectation across government
agencies and MPP has not been precluded from this,
that you cut back on, uh, back room functions, I guess.
Um, however, uh,
and looking through your report, there's still issues,
and I think it's the third year in a row
where you've got issues with the, um,
managing control environment.
And so is as part of the reason why you're still struggling
with that and still, there's still a need for improvement in
that area because you do not have the backroom function
and backroom support that you need.
We have, uh, really developed our organizational maturity
and as we, um, have considered what the organization needs,
there is a level of expertise around government systems
that has now been introduced to the ministry.
We've made some amazing improvements over the
period of that three years.
And remember that the first two years was, um,
under extreme change of conditions.
So we've made a lot of improvements,
we're heading in the right direction.
And, um, always reminded
that continuous improvement is a really important part
of good stewardship of the organization.
So I'm just really pleased that, um, over that period
of three years that has been mentioned,
we've made some huge organizational change.
And part of that is
because the expertise of our staff that we have brought in,
um, and enables us to undertake that stewardship
And on the ratings as well.
I mean, uh, I know the ratings from the last two
or three audits reports remained the same, um,
around the area you just, we had last, last year in
there were issued on the accrued.
We, we still have a bit easier.
There were some issues around the AC crew,
but through a much lower level team,
we experienced last year, uh, auditing, uh, you know,
working with the auditor, we were able to
provided the information on time and the right information.
This is something we kind of didn't
to do well over the last couple years.
So the thing of audit is very black
and white, so the rating is the rating,
but, uh, there has been quite major
improvements across the organization.
I think the committee would like
to see you move out of that space.
Yeah. So to actually indicate
that there has been improvement in that area
after three years of same so space.
Yeah. Um, my final question is just in relation to
the priority that MPP has set around, uh,
economic development for Pacific peoples.
Uh, what we've seen in the last year is that, um,
you've lost significant funding when it came
to a very successful women program,
and that funding did not move on to any other agency
and has not been earmarked
for Pacific people in any other agency.
Uh, you also have had a, um, significant decline in funding
for your business related program.
And, um, I'm not sure we've necessarily seen that money
re reinvested in any other agency, uh,
to put a focus on Pacific business, either.
Um, do you think that these cuts in funding,
'cause some of us do at this table, uh, significantly, uh,
impact your ability to be able
to successfully deliver on economic development
for Pacific people?
Particularly in light of the fact
that we've got a 12.1% unemployment rate for Pacific peoples
and Pacific businesses are struggling alongside
so many at the moment in al.
Uh, we continue to work really closely with the agencies
that have responsibility, both unemployment
and economic development.
Um, we invest just under $10 million in economic growth.
Uh, last year we saw 484 jobs created
through the Pacific Business Village,
and 778 businesses supported as well
as 149 jobs created under the
OLA Business Fund.
So, um, I think that where we've made savings, again,
has been in that back office space.
We are still putting funds into the economic growth, um,
aspect of our work,
and we are still seeing, um, improvements in our return.
So these are, uh, above, uh, performance, uh,
above the, um, performance metric that we had.
I say a supplement coming,
sort some of the answers actually.
Um, and I just wanna acknowledge this, the, the increasing
reports that you mentioned, uh, which is, you know,
a significant increase, but, um, just scanning the horizon,
you mentioned digital and technology.
I think that you're scanning the sort
of future horizon and opportunities there.
So obviously there's a really important role in the
face-to-face interactions
and direct connection with the community,
but increasingly there's technologies,
the way the communities connect with each other and,
and, and other entities.
Um, and obviously we're an age of, um,
artificial intelligence to certain
reshape the environment for everyone.
What, what opportunities are you looking at in that?
I can just, I guess along we all mentioned
around staffing, our staff, um, work incredibly hard
and incredibly long hours, um, out in communities every day.
Um, and I'm, I'm, I'm just always so encouraged by the, uh,
touch points they have with the community.
They pick up this ability to engage
and do our work in terms of the data and digital space.
We have spent, um, a lot of time this year preparing staff
for a change environment.
I recently did a course where they said
that we'll see more change in the next 10 years than we've
seen in the last 250 years.
So it's really important for us that staff
pick up the opportunity, um, for professional development
and to do things differently.
Part of that is working in the AI space,
and I'll just ask Danielo to go over
what we are doing in this space to really try
and, um, uh, make the most of the opportunity
that this provides us. Yeah,
So over the last 8, 8, 8 months
or so, we uh, actually done that quite a lot of work on ai.
Uh, so the first thing was to understand
how AI is being utilized across the organization.
And basically what we found people are utilizing the two,
uh, after that was basically part of the proper systems
and processes in place, the do's and don'ts of ai.
Uh, and then there's always this skeptical of people
who don't fully understand and quite reluctant to utilize,
but we were able to bring the people on the journey.
Uh, so we've been doing this piece of work and, and,
and, uh, we've done a pretty good, uh, case study
around the long term besides briefing.
So we've done a basic long term side briefing round one.
We got a lot of, uh, uh, feedback from community groups.
And what we found, it talked basically about two
to three weeks of personal people's time to utilize, uh,
to do a full, uh, assessment of the community feedback.
Uh, then it took half the AI is about seconds,
once do its thing during day one week we work virtual staff,
uh, was a teaching opportunity as well, uh,
to utilize the tool, uh,
but was a very good case study
of the efficiencies we can achi achieve.
So people utilize the tool a bit more
and their time becomes free to do more meaningful
and engaging work, rather than being doing admin.
So we move in the right direction
And we play a really important role in, um, putting, uh,
Pacific people into the wider system.
So if we can train them in prompt engineering, um, as well
as them bringing their cultural expertise
and lived experience of working with communities,
they will inevitably contribute
to the wider system in a positive way,
and also offers them wonderful professional development
and career opportunities.
Great. Thank you. Um, good. Laura? Oh, thank you, Mr.
Jen Moderna. Nice to see you guys. Lovely.
Um, my questions about your performance, um, indicators,
they're pretty ambitious and I know
that the ministry is moved to more of a policy shop, um,
than operational delivery.
How did the effect progress
and what does you use, given that is, you know,
your policy idea, but delivered
by another ministry like Ms. D, for
Example. Um,
I'm really keen to to know how you're gonna
mark your performance against that.
Yes, sure. Yeah. Um, so this is part
of the organizational maturity that I talked about earlier.
And I'll give Berna debt an opportunity, um,
to comment on this to.
So over the past two years, uh,
we've had some performance measures that were tagged
to our statement of intent.
It was really actually difficult for us to measure,
and we didn't have, um, responsibility as an agency
to shift those measures.
So this is a really important factor.
'cause we had something like, um, reducing rheumatic, uh,
fever, um, in Pacific communities.
Well, we have absolutely no levers to address that.
So part of us refining our statement of intent
and getting down to good, uh, performance measures was
actually making them attributable to our organization.
So I'll just hand that to Bernadette.
We are currently going through a process of defining
what those performance measures look like,
and you've identified the issue, um, at play.
Part of it will be, there's internal operation measures,
which are the things that we are doing in creating outputs
for, but the other component is the wider system
and how much we have the direct influence for.
We work with a lot of the other, um, government agencies
in relation to Pacific data.
So we understand what data there is available.
We understand the quality of the data issues pertaining
to them, and we also are looking to see what our level is
during a set, our level influence on those
particular data points are.
So it's about refining the wider breadth of the measure
in our, the
Finally, we, uh, implemented a news internally
to ensure those measures are accurate.
Yeah. So, uh, we have a, our committee, uh, uh, as part
of the minutes, which is, uh,
advisory risk and assurance committee.
Uh, and, and one
of the risks we had was basically the quality of data
and also, uh, access to data, basically timely information.
So we, over the last six months, we created,
we started this project called, uh, project,
which basically consolidating all the different data sources
we have, even though we are a small organization,
it was a bit disjointed where the data sits
and who was responsible for it, uh, for what.
But now we have basically a consolidated approach
where the data sits in one place.
Uh, and when we go to the point
of collecting data is a combination between commissioning,
uh, data and insights
and policy to make sure we're collecting
the right information as well.
Tiana, uh, contributions so far?
Um, my, my question is, uh, uh, it links into
what you've been talking about around, uh, around data, um,
uh, and I, and I take the point that you can use these tools
to get better insights with data as well,
but if the data set itself isn't, isn't strong, um, then
that can cause issues.
Um, uh, you've got data that's, you know, not,
not very useful, then regardless of how good the tools are,
the outcomes and your insights
are not gonna be that great as well.
So my questions is around, uh, the advice that you gave
to the ministry for the Minister of Pacific Peoples
around changes to the census.
Uh, in particular, if you could focus on, uh, risks to the,
the degradation, the particular degradation of data quality
and data equity, uh, in terms of, um,
concerns that many have that so
that people are undercounted, uh, in the census
and what these, uh,
what these changes would be for our communities.
Um, certainly. So I guess first off, um, our role is
to give free and frank advice best, you know, based on
what our community needs.
Um, and so we undertook that role, um,
and giving advice to, uh, our minister, our shared minister.
Um, Bernadette, would you like
To? Yeah, certainly.
So, um, in terms
of the changes in the census,
we're moving away from the national, uh, survey
that we previously had, um, through to a more admin based
and, and potentially supplemented worker based type.
We actively seen z other states terms such who in census,
who developed the next census program.
We also have, um, a really good relat working relationship
with stats NZ.
And this is, uh, illustrated through our memorandum
of understanding, which we've recently signed effectively,
that defines us as the Pacific Domain leads them as the,
the leads for data, um, across all of government.
And we are working in partnership to elevate the level
of Pacific data across, um, across board.
But some of the things that we will be advocating
for is incorporation of Pacific voices, um, engagement
with the community in terms of data collection,
future data collection, as well
as making sure we've got a culturally responsive, um,
approach to the design of the next census program.
Now, what, what was the specific concerns that you,
that you took to the Boston, so that we can
sort of understand, uh,
I'll have to go back to you on link in terms of the,
the exact details on that.
If you don't mind. I might just check with, um, James.
James, are you able to, did you want to,
Uh, yes. Um, if you
Come, Come, come to the table,
just cover the specific advice.
Uh, J James, um,
has been the acting deputy secretary for policy.
He's now gone back to his substantive role.
So this is Dr. James Greenwood. Okay.
Our advice, the minister was, um, uh,
basically what you stated, um, that there, there was a risk
to, um, data quality
and representation in official statistics
and population statistics with the change.
But we are working with, um, stets, New Zealand
and other government agencies that will be contributing
to the new system to, um, improve the quality.
And can you tell us, um, specifically about the things
that you've put in place to mitigate those risks
or ongoing project or,
Because the census is, is actively changing
and it's been agreed upon, it's more about looking forward
and trying to, um,
mitigate any future changes, mitigate any risks the next,
I talked about with the community.
So I want take that you've done with you around, um,
what these potential changes might mean.
Um, and particularly around the concerns of,
Because it's currently in its emerging stages, it's only,
um, more recently been announced that there is going
to be any census and stats nz are currently working
through the details of what that looks like.
Once we have more information, we will actively engage
with our communities on
This. And
we, we, we actively engage with the community
to inform our advice as we would with any, um,
policy advice that we contribute.
And, and can, can you explain to us
what the feedback loop would look like?
So for example, if the community says,
actually we concerned about, um,
Pacific peoples being undercounted,
our children being undercounted, um,
and that might mean that the data itself might not be
as robust as it should be.
Um, so can you talk to us a bit about that?
I, I think that's exactly how the, the process works, is
that we will talk to, um, the relevant stakeholders,
formed the advice, put the advice up as part
of our free and frank advice.
Um, and then once the decision's made, then we work to, um,
manage the issues as the team has already pointed out.
So, so we've got, uh, the memorandum of understanding
where the domain leads will continue to, um, support, uh,
statistics in developing a really robust system to make sure
that we, um, the consumer might be just
One move on, just obviously data important, um,
and dashboarding all that data, the decision makers.
And I'm sure with your policy advice
role that's, uh, critical.
Uh, is it, are there, do you have any sort
of overarching thoughts about what,
where the data could be better?
Um, and, and how that could be better dashboarded, uh,
because I, 'cause there's, there's
so many different entities that are collecting data at
different data points, but the integration is one
of the challenges from what I've seen in different sectors.
I'm, I'm just really enthused by, uh, the engagement
that we can have with some of these bigger agencies
and the openness to, um, our expertise in helping
to synthesize the data, the data that they have.
Um, yeah, I don't know if there's anything we wanted.
Um, we, one of the things that we are doing,
and I'm, I'm actually very proud of our staff
for their ability to work with agencies.
Good example of what we're talking about is our work with,
um, uh, ministry of Health.
Um, so other agencies will be contributing
data for the census.
We're working with agencies like the Ministry of Health
to improve the quality of their collection, analysis
and interpretation so that, um,
we can be more prepared for the next census.
And, um, we're just really, um, delighted in the last week
for the first time, we have been able to upload some
of our own data into the IDI.
Um, and this has never been done
before, so that's a significant achievement
as well. Oh, great.
Well, we're hearing more about this afternoon. Ah, Helen,
What discussions have you had
with the Public Service Commission
for your minister on a potential merger
or disestablishment of ministry and
or what work has been done to analyze the potential merger
or disestablishment of the ministry?
Um, so firstly, um,
the Prime Minister has rolled out any a,
um, idea of a merger.
Um, I have worked with, uh, the other population
agencies as we often, um, to look at areas
where there might be opportunities
to work more effectively together.
But there is not.
We have, we are not doing any work in the background, um,
around possible mergers
and our energy is on making the system work smarter
and more collaboratively.
Um, and we do that as, uh, to align. I
Just wanna be clear, you haven't done any work on that.
We have, um, worked together as agencies
to look at where there might be opportunities.
So you, for us to align our work program,
but we are not doing any work on a, a
Merger. Have you done any work
to, to analyze the potential merger
or just establishment?
We've done no work to, to,
to analyze just establishment of the ministry.
We have looked at areas, Trinity line our work
and we more closely together,
but we haven't looked at merging.
Uh, Maureen, Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I'd like to turn my questions to, um,
the business fund and the Pacific Business Trust
and the investments being made there.
Can you just run through some of the things, um,
that have had the direct investment
and to Pacific businesses,
and particularly what form they take, whether that's loans
or grants or equity share?
Sure. And, and of course, how many of those businesses are,
you know, still operating and how many have failed?
Sure. Um, so first can I talk about, uh,
the Pacific Business Village?
So this is part of that $10 million that,
um, I'd mentioned earlier.
So the Pacific Business Village, uh, operates nationwide.
There is about 10 of them, I think.
Um, and essentially what they do is work
with businesses on the ground.
A lot of them are small to medium sized, uh, businesses,
and it's very bespoke.
So, um, they, uh, do a lot of connecting
with other agencies that provide business support services
and, um, including mentoring
of business leaders and that kind of thing.
Uh, business owners, entrepreneurs.
So through the Pacific Business Village there were
484 jobs created.
Um, then we also fund the Pacific Business Trust
and the Pacific Business Trust.
They work again with businesses nationwide.
They do have, uh, a grant fund.
Yeah, they provide grants for small businesses for, uh,
basically cap, uh, capability, uh, development.
Uh, plus they provide financial mentorship, uh,
to business businesses as well, uh, and how they can there
and advertising things a little bit more.
Uh, PBT at the moment, they have, uh,
work joining a half Pacific business,
and the economy of all those business is
around $1.2 billion.
Uh, is that the 4.8 million
that was invested into the trust?
That's correct. Yeah. Then, um,
there is the of business fund.
So this is a competitive fund that, uh,
entrepreneurs can apply to,
to help support their business innovation
and strategic planning and development.
Um, and through that there were 149 jobs created.
I'm, I'm able to give you the numbers of business closures,
but we can come back to you on that.
Thank you.
Um, could you Just thank you address,
Address the part about whether they're loans, grants,
or investment in those
Businesses. I'll need
to come back to you on that one too.
It's a myriad, not usually not loans.
It's more, um, grant funding. Okay. Yeah.
Okay. Um, thank you.
So, um, this line of questioning is specifically around, uh,
Pacific Unemployment
and your role, um, with supporting, with advice on that.
Um, as we know, the unemployment rate
for Pacific people remain stubbornly high at 12.1%, um,
and under utilizations at 20.3%.
Um, and that's all, that's double, uh, what it is for the,
the rest of the population.
There's three questions I have on this particular part.
One is, what is your role
in supporting PA Pacifica employment and training?
Um, what is the ministry doing
to combat that rise?
Um, and then finally, just in relation
to the 3.865 million in underspend
around skills training
and employment appropriation, um, how is that appropriate
or helpful, um, when we've got rising unemployment
for Pacific people and you are underspending on an area
where we would expect there to be attention paid
and a focus put, um, by your government agency?
Sure. Um, I'm going to answer in reverse.
So, um, if I can just address the underspend.
So the underspend in 2324 was
through accruals, not realized as, um, final provider,
uh, invoicing came in lower than what we anticipated.
So with the Triple AL tier program,
which is the program which focuses in knots in education
training, um,
and employment, the way the contracts are organized is
that providers get an incentivized, uh, payment program.
And so what we need to do is accrue for, uh, flex
now, uh, providers overdelivered
and uh, we do do active contract management,
but we still need to, um, allow for that buffer.
So, uh, the underspend came
because the accruals were not realized.
We didn't know that until, um, into the next financial year.
Okay, so just to be clear,
so the under there was no underspend on the
24 25 financial year.
The underspend you seeing was accrual from 2324,
where we pay providers based on, on delivery.
So you a certain whatever engagement if a person,
you get to pay a certain amount.
So at the end of the financial year, out
of the 11 odd million dollars we had for Tupu,
that amount was under spin.
But we didn't to know what the final invoice
would do, local wash, keep
It a program or, Um, so just for
that program, um, the target was 2000
and the delivery was 2,736 placements.
So we overachieved
and, um, money was returned to the center
'cause of that across crisis. That
Was in the 2000, 23, 24 Year.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, we have no underspend this year.
Um, combat, um,
combating the issue.
So, um, as you mentioned, we continue to work, uh,
closely with the Ministry of Social Development to make sure
that they, um, are well equipped.
But I have to say that the Ministry
of Social Development have a really strong Pacific team.
And also, um, working closely with Debbie, I,
I'm just always, um, enthused
by her own touch touchpoints into the community,
particularly the Pacific community
and her own expert advisory group.
Um, in terms of the role
of us supporting Pacific Unemployment, while it's high,
we um, continue to work with the ministry.
We have this program, and I'll give, uh,
flow an opportunity just to talk about, uh, some
of the examples of where we've ma managed to shift,
because we do work really hard in this area.
Um, but it is in the context of challenging times.
Yeah. Thank you Jody. So, um, as she mentioned, our
program is placed over 2,700 of our Pacific,
not in education, employment,
and training into, um, those pathways who, one example is
of a, a young Pacific Youth needs who, um,
faced mental health challenges after losing his job.
He worked with one of our providers, received the one-on-one
tailored support, pastoral cultural supports, um,
on the job readiness, CV uplift,
and manage to secure a full-time role within an industry
that he's passionate about, which is sports.
Um, we've had feedback
that he's now been promoted into a senior role
and giving back to other Pacific needs
that are not in employment education and training.
So, um, at the heart of this program's funding, it's,
it's not just about about creating, you know, this is one
of two 30 in 36 place.
One, one more step on on this, um, because
although I appreciate each individual case,
I guess we are dealing on mass with an unemployment program,
uh, problem for Pacific at the moment.
Um, I'm just noting the committees 2020 3 24
report, uh, where you intended
to get at least 7,500 pasifica people
who are not in employment educational training
into placements between June 21
and June 25 as part of the PU program.
Now that program's been cut by $22 million.
Does the ministry have a similar target for 2025
to 2029?
And if so, what is it?
Um, we, the program is the program
that we'll be transitioning
to the Ministry for Social Development.
So our role will be continuing to work with the ministry
to address, um, issues of unemployment
and to ensure that they're supported in delivering
to Pacific communities.
Will they have a similar target to
what you had set for the,
We're going to continue to work with, um, the ministry
around what that might look like.
I know that they will be proactively looking at this, um,
to address it in the wider context.
Um, so we'll, we'll, we'll go through
that process at the appropriate time so
that the program will transition at the end
of this financial year.
And we've started those conversations, now
We're getting closer time.
And I've just got a question that's, um,
let's take a slightly different tack.
But obviously, um, the work you do is in policy work
around Pacific people in New Zealand is really important.
Another po uh, thing
that's really important is the connection
to the wider diaspora, um, uh, across the Pacific and, and,
and New Zealand's connection,
which is a very strong one, one.
Uh, so do you provide advice, uh,
and any support et cetera on
that, that you can speak to us about?
Sure. We, uh, and is that
Reflected in your report, Geraldine?
'cause I was just looking for the impact
connections in conduct.
Um, I, I'm not, yes, it is, uh, reflected in the report.
I, I think firstly, um,
we support the minister
and the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, uh,
with work in the diaspora, uh, sorry, in the region.
And, uh, particularly the diaspora have really strong
connections into the region.
Our languages program now, for example,
we have more language speakers of, and Maori
and Newan here in New Zealand.
So New Zealand plays a really important, um,
role in the Pacific
and internationally in preserving, uh, culture and identity.
So the team have been working really hard on that.
Quick stop. Um, sort of following on from what Joseph
and Helen was said as well, about the advice that you've,
you've provided to, to the Prime Minister for example,
around exactly that, the importance of those connections
between here and over the Diabo communities.
We have the treaty app friendship with Samo
Rowan countries as well.
It seems to me to be a very good part of an argument
why we should retain and keep
and resource better at the ministry Pacific peoples.
And I'm wondering if that advice is flowing through
to relevant ministries.
I I don't have any further comment
to make on that. Thank you for your
Comment.
Thank, thank you very much for your time this morning
for your work with very important
and valued for civic people and across the wider region.
Thank you.